Joshua Smith
Professor Olsen
BMIS 444
1 May 2026
ATP Tennis Tour Malloy Project
	It has been a great semester learning and experimenting with new technologies in BMIS 444. By this time, I feel a lot more comfortable using VS code to do projects like this and I have fun doing it. What I chose to do this time was find a dataset containing ATP tour tennis matches from the past couple decades and run some insights on it. As a tennis player myself, I watch a ton of professional tennis and it is a hobby of mine to travel around to different professional tournaments around the world. Because of this, I thought it would be super cool to see what I could do with a tennis dataset if I were to run some queries to answer some questions I was interested in.
	I found the dataset I ended up using on Kaggle. I was lucky to find a good dataset containing over 60,000 rows of tennis matches from the past few decades, more than enough to run the analysis I wanted to. From there, I created a few files in VS code where I could upload the code required to execute my project and run the appropriate queries. I started by answering a simple question, more to check the validity of the dataset. I wanted to see what surfaces the dataset was pulling its matches from, hoping that most came from hard courts as there are more hard court tournaments on tour than anything else. Luckily, the query proved my thoughts right, as hard court tournaments take up the top spot in the dataset. Something else I found interesting was the addition of carpet courts. Carpet courts are no longer used on tour but were used up until 2009 which I forgot about. You can see the results of my first query below.

Next, I wanted to see which players had won the most matches according to the dataset. I assumed the “big 3” of Novak Djokovic, Rafael Nadal, and Roger Federer would be top of the list as they had dominated the sport for the past 20 years. After running the query, my initial thoughts were confirmed as the big 3 topped the list. You can see that in the query below:

I want to highlight one more query I ran, which looks at betting odds for the different surfaces the matches took place on. Basically, I wanted to see which surfaces had the most predictable outcomes and which ones were more uncertain. What I found was that carpet courts were the most predictable while grass courts were the most unpredictable. There are a couple of key insights to draw from this. First, carpet courts are no longer used and were only used for a short time on the ATP tour. Because of this, there are a lot less matches in the dataset and the favorites seem to have won more often than not. On the other end, grass can be a very unpredictable surface, as the court deteriorates near the baseline as the tournaments go on. This makes for a lot more variability and chances for lower ranked players compared to a hard court where everything is constant. You can see the data in the query below:

I ran a few more queries but the ones I showed were what I thought were most relevant.
Looking back on this project, I thought it was really useful. Before this class, I would have no idea how to take a dataset and create actionable insights from it. However, getting exposure to malloy doing a project like this was great experience and something I could take about in later interviews.
